
      HIS FIRST BOOK
    

      concerning HIMSELF:
    

      Wherein Antoninus recordeth, What and of whom, whether Parents, Friends,
      or Masters; by their good examples, or good advice and counsel, he had
      learned:
    

      Divided into Numbers or Sections.
    

      ANTONINUS Book vi. Num. xlviii. Whensoever thou wilt rejoice thyself,
      think and meditate upon those good parts and especial gifts, which thou
      hast observed in any of them that live with thee:
    

      as industry in one, in another modesty, in another bountifulness, in
      another some other thing. For nothing can so much rejoice thee, as the
      resemblances and parallels of several virtues, eminent in the dispositions
      of them that live with thee, especially when all at once, as it were, they
      represent themselves unto thee. See therefore, that thou have them always
      in a readiness.
    

      THE FIRST BOOK
    

      I. Of my grandfather Verus I have learned to be gentle and meek, and to
      refrain from all anger and passion. From the fame and memory of him that
      begot me I have learned both shamefastness and manlike behaviour. Of my
      mother I have learned to be religious, and bountiful; and to forbear, not
      only to do, but to intend any evil; to content myself with a spare diet,
      and to fly all such excess as is incidental to great wealth. Of my
      great-grandfather, both to frequent public schools and auditories, and to
      get me good and able teachers at home; and that I ought not to think much,
      if upon such occasions, I were at excessive charges.
    

      II. Of him that brought me up, not to be fondly addicted to either of
      the two great factions of the coursers in the circus, called Prasini, and
      Veneti: nor in the amphitheatre partially to favour any of the gladiators,
      or fencers, as either the Parmularii, or the Secutores. Moreover, to
      endure labour; nor to need many things; when I have anything to do, to do
      it myself rather than by others; not to meddle with many businesses; and
      not easily to admit of any slander.
    

      III. Of Diognetus, not to busy myself about vain things, and not easily
      to believe those things, which are commonly spoken, by such as take upon
      them to work wonders, and by sorcerers, or prestidigitators, and
      impostors; concerning the power of charms, and their driving out of
      demons, or evil spirits; and the like. Not to keep quails for the game;
      nor to be mad after such things. Not to be offended with other men's
      liberty of speech, and to apply myself unto philosophy. Him also I must
      thank, that ever I heard first Bacchius, then Tandasis and Marcianus, and
      that I did write dialogues in my youth; and that I took liking to the
      philosophers' little couch and skins, and such other things, which by the
      Grecian discipline are proper to those who profess philosophy.
    

      IV. To Rusticus I am beholding, that I first entered into the conceit
      that my life wanted some redress and cure. And then, that I did not fall
      into the ambition of ordinary sophists, either to write tracts concerning
      the common theorems, or to exhort men unto virtue and the study of
      philosophy by public orations; as also that I never by way of ostentation
      did affect to show myself an active able man, for any kind of bodily
      exercises. And that I gave over the study of rhetoric and poetry, and of
      elegant neat language. That I did not use to walk about the house in my
      long robe, nor to do any such things. Moreover I learned of him to write
      letters without any affectation, or curiosity; such as that was, which by
      him was written to my mother from Sinuessa: and to be easy and ready to be
      reconciled, and well pleased again with them that had offended me, as soon
      as any of them would be content to seek unto me again. To read with
      diligence; not to rest satisfied with a light and superficial knowledge,
      nor quickly to assent to things commonly spoken of: whom also I must thank
      that ever I lighted upon Epictetus his Hypomnemata, or moral commentaries
      and common-factions: which also he gave me of his own.
    

      V. From Apollonius, true liberty, and unvariable steadfastness, and not
      to regard anything at all, though never so little, but right and reason:
      and always, whether in the sharpest pains, or after the loss of a child,
      or in long diseases, to be still the same man; who also was a present and
      visible example unto me, that it was possible for the same man to be both
      vehement and remiss: a man not subject to be vexed, and offended with the
      incapacity of his scholars and auditors in his lectures and expositions;
      and a true pattern of a man who of all his good gifts and faculties, least
      esteemed in himself, that his excellent skill and ability to teach and
      persuade others the common theorems and maxims of the Stoic philosophy. Of
      him also I learned how to receive favours and kindnesses (as commonly they
      are accounted:) from friends, so that I might not become obnoxious unto
      them, for them, nor more yielding upon occasion, than in right I ought;
      and yet so that I should not pass them neither, as an unsensible and
      unthankful man.
    

      VI. Of Sextus, mildness and the pattern of a family governed with
      paternal affection; and a purpose to live according to nature: to be grave
      without affectation: to observe carefully the several dispositions of my
      friends, not to be offended with idiots, nor unseasonably to set upon
      those that are carried with the vulgar opinions, with the theorems, and
      tenets of philosophers: his conversation being an example how a man might
      accommodate himself to all men and companies; so that though his company
      were sweeter and more pleasing than any flatterer's cogging and fawning;
      yet was it at the same time most respected and reverenced: who also had a
      proper happiness and faculty, rationally and methodically to find out, and
      set in order all necessary determinations and instructions for a man's
      life. A man without ever the least appearance of anger, or any other
      passion; able at the same time most exactly to observe the Stoic Apathia,
      or unpassionateness, and yet to be most tender-hearted: ever of good
      credit; and yet almost without any noise, or rumour: very learned, and yet
      making little show.
    

      VII. From Alexander the Grammarian, to be un-reprovable myself, and not
      reproachfully to reprehend any man for a barbarism, or a solecism, or any
      false pronunciation, but dextrously by way of answer, or testimony, or
      confirmation of the same matter (taking no notice of the word) to utter it
      as it should have been spoken; or by some other such close and indirect
      admonition, handsomely and civilly to tell him of it.
    

      VIII. Of Fronto, to how much envy and fraud and hypocrisy the state of a
      tyrannous king is subject unto, and how they who are commonly called
      εὐπατρίδαι,
      i.e. nobly born, are in some sort incapable, or void of natural
      affection.
    

      IX. Of Alexander the Platonic, not often nor without great necessity to
      say, or to write to any man in a letter, 'I am not at leisure'; nor in
      this manner still to put off those duties, which we owe to our friends and
      acquaintances (to every one in his kind) under pretence of urgent affairs.
    

      X. Of Catulus, not to contemn any friend's expostulation, though unjust,
      but to strive to reduce him to his former disposition: freely and heartily
      to speak well of all my masters upon any occasion, as it is reported of
      Domitius, and Athenodotus: and to love my children with true affection.
    

      XI. From my brother Severus, to be kind and loving to all them of my
      house and family; by whom also I came to the knowledge of Thrasea and
      Helvidius, and Cato, and Dio, and Brutus. He it was also that did put me
      in the first conceit and desire of an equal commonwealth, administered by
      justice and equality; and of a kingdom wherein should be regarded nothing
      more than the good and welfare of the subjects. Of him also, to observe a
      constant tenor, (not interrupted, with any other cares and distractions,)
      in the study and esteem of philosophy: to be bountiful and liberal in the
      largest measure; always to hope the best; and to be confident that my
      friends love me. In whom I moreover observed open dealing towards those
      whom he reproved at any time, and that his friends might without all doubt
      or much observation know what he would, or would not, so open and plain
      was he.
    

      XII. From Claudius Maximus, in all things to endeavour to have power
      of myself, and in nothing to be carried about; to be cheerful and
      courageous in all sudden chances and accidents, as in sicknesses: to love
      mildness, and moderation, and gravity: and to do my business, whatsoever
      it be, thoroughly, and without querulousness. Whatsoever he said, all men
      believed him that as he spake, so he thought, and whatsoever he did, that
      he did it with a good intent. His manner was, never to wonder at anything;
      never to be in haste, and yet never slow: nor to be perplexed, or
      dejected, or at any time unseemly, or excessively to laugh: nor to be
      angry, or suspicious, but ever ready to do good, and to forgive, and to
      speak truth; and all this, as one that seemed rather of himself to have
      been straight and right, than ever to have been rectified or redressed;
      neither was there any man that ever thought himself undervalued by him, or
      that could find in his heart, to think himself a better man than he. He
      would also be very pleasant and gracious.
    

      XIII. In my father, I observed his meekness; his constancy without
      wavering in those things, which after a due examination and deliberation,
      he had determined. How free from all vanity he carried himself in matter
      of honour and dignity, (as they are esteemed:) his laboriousness and
      assiduity, his readiness to hear any man, that had aught to say tending to
      any common good: how generally and impartially he would give every man his
      due; his skill and knowledge, when rigour or extremity, or when remissness
      or moderation was in season; how he did abstain from all unchaste love of
      youths; his moderate condescending to other men's occasions as an ordinary
      man, neither absolutely requiring of his friends, that they should wait
      upon him at his ordinary meals, nor that they should of necessity
      accompany him in his journeys; and that whensoever any business upon some
      necessary occasions was to be put off and omitted before it could be
      ended, he was ever found when he went about it again, the same man that he
      was before. His accurate examination of things in consultations, and
      patient hearing of others. He would not hastily give over the search of
      the matter, as one easy to be satisfied with sudden notions and
      apprehensions. His care to preserve his friends; how neither at any time
      he would carry himself towards them with disdainful neglect, and grow
      weary of them; nor yet at any time be madly fond of them. His contented
      mind in all things, his cheerful countenance, his care to foresee things
      afar off, and to take order for the least, without any noise or clamour.
      Moreover how all acclamations and flattery were repressed by him: how
      carefully he observed all things necessary to the government, and kept an
      account of the common expenses, and how patiently he did abide that he was
      reprehended by some for this his strict and rigid kind of dealing. How he
      was neither a superstitious worshipper of the gods, nor an ambitious
      pleaser of men, or studious of popular applause; but sober in all things,
      and everywhere observant of that which was fitting; no affecter of
      novelties: in those things which conduced to his ease and convenience,
      (plenty whereof his fortune did afford him,) without pride and bragging,
      yet with all freedom and liberty: so that as he did freely enjoy them
      without any anxiety or affectation when they were present; so when absent,
      he found no want of them. Moreover, that he was never commended by any
      man, as either a learned acute man, or an obsequious officious man, or a
      fine orator; but as a ripe mature man, a perfect sound man; one that could
      not endure to be flattered; able to govern both himself and others.
      Moreover, how much he did honour all true philosophers, without upbraiding
      those that were not so; his sociableness, his gracious and delightful
      conversation, but never unto satiety; his care of his body within bounds
      and measure, not as one that desired to live long, or over-studious of
      neatness, and elegancy; and yet not as one that did not regard it: so that
      through his own care and providence, he seldom needed any inward physic,
      or outward applications: but especially how ingeniously he would yield to
      any that had obtained any peculiar faculty, as either eloquence, or the
      knowledge of the laws, or of ancient customs, or the like; and how he
      concurred with them, in his best care and endeavour that every one of them
      might in his kind, for that wherein he excelled, be regarded and esteemed:
      and although he did all things carefully after the ancient customs of his
      forefathers, yet even of this was he not desirous that men should take
      notice, that he did imitate ancient customs. Again, how he was not easily
      moved and tossed up and down, but loved to be constant, both in the same
      places and businesses; and how after his great fits of headache he would
      return fresh and vigorous to his wonted affairs. Again, that secrets he
      neither had many, nor often, and such only as concerned public matters:
      his discretion and moderation, in exhibiting of the public sights and
      shows for the pleasure and pastime of the people: in public buildings.
      congiaries, and the like. In all these things, having a respect unto men
      only as men, and to the equity of the things themselves, and not unto the
      glory that might follow. Never wont to use the baths at unseasonable
      hours; no builder; never curious, or solicitous, either about his meat, or
      about the workmanship, or colour of his clothes, or about anything that
      belonged to external beauty. In all his conversation, far from all
      inhumanity, all boldness, and incivility, all greediness and impetuosity;
      never doing anything with such earnestness, and intention, that a man
      could say of him, that he did sweat about it: but contrariwise, all things
      distinctly, as at leisure; without trouble; orderly, soundly, and
      agreeably. A man might have applied that to him, which is recorded of
      Socrates, that he knew how to want, and to enjoy those things, in the want
      whereof, most men show themselves weak; and in the fruition, intemperate:
      but to hold out firm and constant, and to keep within the compass of true
      moderation and sobriety in either estate, is proper to a man, who hath a
      perfect and invincible soul; such as he showed himself in the sickness of
      Maximus.
    

      XIV. From the gods I received that I had good grandfathers, and parents,
      a good sister, good masters, good domestics, loving kinsmen, almost all
      that I have; and that I never through haste and rashness transgressed
      against any of them, notwithstanding that my disposition was such, as that
      such a thing (if occasion had been) might very well have been committed by
      me, but that It was the mercy of the gods, to prevent such a concurring of
      matters and occasions, as might make me to incur this blame. That I was
      not long brought up by the concubine of my father; that I preserved the
      flower of my youth. That I took not upon me to be a man before my time,
      but rather put it off longer than I needed. That I lived under the
      government of my lord and father, who would take away from me all pride
      and vainglory, and reduce me to that conceit and opinion that it was not
      impossible for a prince to live in the court without a troop of guards and
      followers, extraordinary apparel, such and such torches and statues, and
      other like particulars of state and magnificence; but that a man may
      reduce and contract himself almost to the state of a private man, and yet
      for all that not to become the more base and remiss in those public
      matters and affairs, wherein power and authority is requisite. That I have
      had such a brother, who by his own example might stir me up to think of
      myself; and by his respect and love, delight and please me. That I have
      got ingenuous children, and that they were not born distorted, nor with
      any other natural deformity. That I was no great proficient in the study
      of rhetoric and poetry, and of other faculties, which perchance I might
      have dwelt upon, if I had found myself to go on in them with success. That
      I did by times prefer those, by whom I was brought up, to such places and
      dignities, which they seemed unto me most to desire; and that I did not
      put them off with hope and expectation, that (since that they were yet but
      young) I would do the same hereafter. That I ever knew Apollonius and
      Rusticus, and Maximus. That I have had occasion often and effectually to
      consider and meditate with myself, concerning that life which is according
      to nature, what the nature and manner of it is: so that as for the gods
      and such suggestions, helps and inspirations, as might be expected from
      them, nothing did hinder, but that I might have begun long before to live
      according to nature; or that even now that I was not yet partaker and in
      present possession of that life, that I myself (in that I did not observe
      those inward motions, and suggestions, yea and almost plain and apparent
      instructions and admonitions of the gods,) was the only cause of it. That
      my body in such a life, hath been able to hold out so long. That I never
      had to do with Benedicta and Theodotus, yea and afterwards when I fell
      into some fits of love, I was soon cured. That having been often
      displeased with Rusticus, I never did him anything for which afterwards I
      had occasion to repent. That it being so that my mother was to die young,
      yet she lived with me all her latter years. That as often as I had a
      purpose to help and succour any that either were poor, or fallen into some
      present necessity, I never was answered by my officers that there was not
      ready money enough to do it; and that I myself never had occasion to
      require the like succour from any other. That I have such a wife, so
      obedient, so loving, so ingenuous. That I had choice of fit and able men,
      to whom I might commit the bringing up of my children. That by dreams I
      have received help, as for other things, so in particular, how I might
      stay my casting of blood, and cure my dizziness, as that also that
      happened to thee in Cajeta, as unto Chryses when he prayed by the
      seashore. And when I did first apply myself to philosophy, that I did not
      fall into the hands of some sophists, or spent my time either in reading
      the manifold volumes of ordinary philosophers, nor in practising myself in
      the solution of arguments and fallacies, nor dwelt upon the studies of the
      meteors, and other natural curiosities. All these things without the
      assistance of the gods, and fortune, could not have been.
    

      XV. In the country of the Quadi at Granua, these. Betimes in the morning
      say to thyself, This day I shalt have to do with an idle curious man, with
      an unthankful man, a railer, a crafty, false, or an envious man; an
      unsociable uncharitable man. All these ill qualities have happened unto
      them, through ignorance of that which is truly good and truly bad. But I
      that understand the nature of that which is good, that it only is to be
      desired, and of that which is bad, that it only is truly odious and
      shameful: who know moreover, that this transgressor, whosoever he be, is
      my kinsman, not by the same blood and seed, but by participation of the
      same reason, and of the same divine particle; How can I either be hurt by
      any of those, since it is not in their power to make me incur anything
      that is truly reproachful? or angry, and ill affected towards him, who by
      nature is so near unto me? for we are all born to be fellow-workers, as
      the feet, the hands, and the eyelids; as the rows of the upper and under
      teeth: for such therefore to be in opposition, is against nature; and what
      is it to chafe at, and to be averse from, but to be in opposition?
    

      XVI. Whatsoever I am, is either flesh, or life, or that which we
      commonly call the mistress and overruling part of man; reason. Away with
      thy books, suffer not thy mind any more to be distracted, and carried to
      and fro; for it will not be; but as even now ready to die, think little of
      thy flesh: blood, bones, and a skin; a pretty piece of knit and twisted
      work, consisting of nerves, veins and arteries; think no more of it, than
      so. And as for thy life, consider what it is; a wind; not one constant
      wind neither, but every moment of an hour let out, and sucked in again.
      The third, is thy ruling part; and here consider; Thou art an old man;
      suffer not that excellent part to be brought in subjection, and to become
      slavish: suffer it not to be drawn up and down with unreasonable and
      unsociable lusts and motions, as it were with wires and nerves; suffer it
      not any more, either to repine at anything now present, or to fear and fly
      anything to come, which the destiny hath appointed thee.
    

      XVII. Whatsoever proceeds from the gods immediately, that any man will
      grant totally depends from their divine providence. As for those things
      that are commonly said to happen by fortune, even those must be conceived
      to have dependence from nature, or from that first and general connection,
      and concatenation of all those things, which more apparently by the divine
      providence are administered and brought to pass. All things flow from
      thence: and whatsoever it is that is, is both necessary, and conducing to
      the whole (part of which thou art), and whatsoever it is that is requisite
      and necessary for the preservation of the general, must of necessity for
      every particular nature, be good and behoveful. And as for the whole, it
      is preserved, as by the perpetual mutation and conversion of the simple
      elements one into another, so also by the mutation, and alteration of
      things mixed and compounded. Let these things suffice thee; let them be
      always unto thee, as thy general rules and precepts. As for thy thirst
      after books, away with it with all speed, that thou die not murmuring and
      complaining, but truly meek and well satisfied, and from thy heart
      thankful unto the gods.
    



      THE SECOND BOOK
    

      I. Remember how long thou hast already put off these things, and how
      often a certain day and hour as it were, having been set unto thee by the
      gods, thou hast neglected it. It is high time for thee to understand the
      true nature both of the world, whereof thou art a part; and of that Lord
      and Governor of the world, from whom, as a channel from the spring, thou
      thyself didst flow: and that there is but a certain limit of time
      appointed unto thee, which if thou shalt not make use of to calm and allay
      the many distempers of thy soul, it will pass away and thou with it, and
      never after return.
    

      II. Let it be thy earnest and incessant care as a Roman and a man to
      perform whatsoever it is that thou art about, with true and unfeigned
      gravity, natural affection, freedom and justice: and as for all other
      cares, and imaginations, how thou mayest ease thy mind of them. Which thou
      shalt do; if thou shalt go about every action as thy last action, free
      from all vanity, all passionate and wilful aberration from reason, and
      from all hypocrisy, and self-love, and dislike of those things, which by
      the fates or appointment of God have happened unto thee. Thou seest that
      those things, which for a man to hold on in a prosperous course, and to
      live a divine life, are requisite and necessary, are not many, for the
      gods will require no more of any man, that shall but keep and observe
      these things.
    

      III. Do, soul, do; abuse and contemn thyself; yet a while and the time
      for thee to respect thyself, will be at an end. Every man's happiness
      depends from himself, but behold thy life is almost at an end, whiles
      affording thyself no respect, thou dost make thy happiness to consist in
      the souls, and conceits of other men.
    

      IV. Why should any of these things that happen externally, so much
      distract thee? Give thyself leisure to learn some good thing, and cease
      roving and wandering to and fro. Thou must also take heed of another kind
      of wandering, for they are idle in their actions, who toil and labour in
      this life, and have no certain scope to which to direct all their motions,
      and desires.
    

      V. For not observing the state of another man's soul, scarce was ever
      any man known to be unhappy. Tell whosoever they be that intend not, and
      guide not by reason and discretion the motions of their own souls, they
      must of necessity be unhappy.
    

      VI. These things thou must always have in mind: What is the nature
      of the universe, and what is mine—in particular: This unto that what
      relation it hath: what kind of part, of what kind of universe it is: And
      that there is nobody that can hinder thee, but that thou mayest always
      both do and speak those things which are agreeable to that nature, whereof
      thou art a part.
    


      VII. Theophrastus, where he compares sin with sin (as after a vulgar
      sense such things I grant may be compared:) says well and like a
      philosopher, that those sins are greater which are committed through lust,
      than those which are committed through anger. For he that is angry seems
      with a kind of grief and close contraction of himself, to turn away from
      reason; but he that sins through lust, being overcome by pleasure, doth in
      his very sin bewray a more impotent, and unmanlike disposition. Well then
      and like a philosopher doth he say, that he of the two is the more to be
      condemned, that sins with pleasure, than he that sins with grief. For
      indeed this latter may seem first to have been wronged, and so in some
      manner through grief thereof to have been forced to be angry, whereas he
      who through lust doth commit anything, did of himself merely resolve upon
      that action.
    


      VIII. Whatsoever thou dost affect, whatsoever thou dost project, so do,
      and so project all, as one who, for aught thou knowest, may at this very
      present depart out of this life. And as for death, if there be any gods,
      it is no grievous thing to leave the society of men. The gods will do thee
      no hurt, thou mayest be sure. But if it be so that there be no gods, or
      that they take no care of the world, why should I desire to live in a
      world void of gods, and of all divine providence? But gods there be
      certainly, and they take care for the world; and as for those things which
      be truly evil, as vice and wickedness, such things they have put in a
      man's own power, that he might avoid them if he would: and had there been
      anything besides that had been truly bad and evil, they would have had a
      care of that also, that a man might have avoided it. But why should that
      be thought to hurt and prejudice a man's life in this world, which cannot
      any ways make man himself the better, or the worse in his own person?
      Neither must we think that the nature of the universe did either through
      ignorance pass these things, or if not as ignorant of them, yet as unable
      either to prevent, or better to order and dispose them. It cannot be that
      she through want either of power or skill, should have committed such a
      thing, so as to suffer all things both good and bad, equally and
      promiscuously, to happen unto all both good and bad. As for life
      therefore, and death, honour and dishonour, labour and pleasure, riches
      and poverty, all these things happen unto men indeed, both good and bad,
      equally; but as things which of themselves are neither good nor bad;
      because of themselves, neither shameful nor praiseworthy.
    


      IX. Consider how quickly all things are dissolved and resolved: the
      bodies and substances themselves, into the matter and substance of the
      world: and their memories into the general age and time of the world.
      Consider the nature of all worldly sensible things; of those especially,
      which either ensnare by pleasure, or for their irksomeness are dreadful,
      or for their outward lustre and show are in great esteem and request, how
      vile and contemptible, how base and corruptible, how destitute of all true
      life and being they are.
    


      X. It is the part of a man endowed with a good understanding faculty, to
      consider what they themselves are in very deed, from whose bare conceits
      and voices, honour and credit do proceed: as also what it is to die, and
      how if a man shall consider this by itself alone, to die, and separate
      from it in his mind all those things which with it usually represent
      themselves unto us, he can conceive of it no otherwise, than as of a work
      of nature, and he that fears any work of nature, is a very child. Now
      death, it is not only a work of nature, but also conducing to nature.
    


      XI. Consider with thyself how man, and by what part of his, is joined
      unto God, and how that part of man is affected, when it is said to be
      diffused. There is nothing more wretched than that soul, which in a kind
      of circuit compasseth all things, searching (as he saith) even the very
      depths of the earth; and by all signs and conjectures prying into the very
      thoughts of other men's souls; and yet of this, is not sensible, that it
      is sufficient for a man to apply himself wholly, and to confine all his
      thoughts and cares to the tendance of that spirit which is within him, and
      truly and really to serve him. His service doth consist in this, that a
      man keep himself pure from all violent passion and evil affection, from
      all rashness and vanity, and from all manner of discontent, either in
      regard of the gods or men. For indeed whatsoever proceeds from the gods,
      deserves respect for their worth and excellency; and whatsoever proceeds
      from men, as they are our kinsmen, should by us be entertained, with love,
      always; sometimes, as proceeding from their ignorance, of that which is
      truly good and bad, (a blindness no less, than that by which we are not
      able to discern between white and black:) with a kind of pity and
      compassion also.
    


      XII. If thou shouldst live three thousand, or as many as ten thousands
      of years, yet remember this, that man can part with no life properly, save
      with that little part of life, which he now lives: and that which he
      lives, is no other, than that which at every instant he parts with. That
      then which is longest of duration, and that which is shortest, come both
      to one effect. For although in regard of that which is already past there
      may be some inequality, yet that time which is now present and in being,
      is equal unto all men. And that being it which we part with whensoever we
      die, it doth manifestly appear, that it can be but a moment of time, that
      we then part with. For as for that which is either past or to come, a man
      cannot be said properly to part with it. For how should a man part with
      that which he hath not? These two things therefore thou must remember.
      First, that all things in the world from all eternity, by a perpetual
      revolution of the same times and things ever continued and renewed, are of
      one kind and nature; so that whether for a hundred or two hundred years
      only, or for an infinite space of time, a man see those things which are
      still the same, it can be no matter of great moment. And secondly, that
      that life which any the longest liver, or the shortest liver parts with,
      is for length and duration the very same, for that only which is present,
      is that, which either of them can lose, as being that only which they
      have; for that which he hath not, no man can truly be said to lose.
    


      XIII. Remember that all is but opinion and conceit, for those things
      are plain and apparent, which were spoken unto Monimus the Cynic; and as
      plain and apparent is the use that may be made of those things, if that
      which is true and serious in them, be received as well as that which is
      sweet and pleasing.
    


      XIV. A man's soul doth wrong and disrespect itself first and especially,
      when as much as in itself lies it becomes an aposteme, and as it were an
      excrescency of the world, for to be grieved and displeased with anything
      that happens in the world, is direct apostacy from the nature of the
      universe; part of which, all particular natures of the world, are.
      Secondly, when she either is averse from any man, or led by contrary
      desires or affections, tending to his hurt and prejudice; such as are the
      souls of them that are angry. Thirdly, when she is overcome by any
      pleasure or pain. Fourthly, when she doth dissemble, and covertly and
      falsely either doth or saith anything. Fifthly, when she doth either
      affect or endeavour anything to no certain end, but rashly and without due
      ratiocination and consideration, how consequent or inconsequent it is to
      the common end. For even the least things ought not to be done, without
      relation unto the end; and the end of the reasonable creatures is, to
      follow and obey him, who is the reason as it were, and the law of this
      great city, and ancient commonwealth.
    


      XV. The time of a man's life is as a point; the substance of it ever
      flowing, the sense obscure; and the whole composition of the body tending
      to corruption. His soul is restless, fortune uncertain, and fame doubtful;
      to be brief, as a stream so are all things belonging to the body; as a
      dream, or as a smoke, so are all that belong unto the soul. Our life is a
      warfare, and a mere pilgrimage. Fame after life is no better than
      oblivion. What is it then that will adhere and follow? Only one thing,
      philosophy. And philosophy doth consist in this, for a man to preserve
      that spirit which is within him, from all manner of contumelies and
      injuries, and above all pains or pleasures; never to do anything either
      rashly, or feignedly, or hypocritically: wholly to depend from himself and
      his own proper actions: all things that happen unto him to embrace
      contentedly, as coming from Him from whom he himself also came; and above
      all things, with all meekness and a calm cheerfulness, to expect death, as
      being nothing else but the resolution of those elements, of which every
      creature is composed. And if the elements themselves suffer nothing by
      this their perpetual conversion of one into another, that dissolution, and
      alteration, which is so common unto all, why should it be feared by any?
      Is not this according to nature? But nothing that is according to nature
      can be evil.
    

Whilst I was at Carnuntum.
